---
layout: post
title:  "Windows Subsystem for Linux"
date:   2022-01-06 22:34:00 +0530
categories: basics
tags: 
---
## Getting started with WSL

Windows users can install the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) using these [instructions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/setup/environment) from Microsoft. As of WSL 2, this installs a real Linux kernel in a low-overhead virtual machine. The Windows filesystem is mounted under `/mnt` on Linux and the Linux filesystem is available as a network share at `\\wsl$` on Windows.

By default the Ubuntu distribution is installed. More information about Ubuntu on WSL can be found [here](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/WSL). This includes some information about running graphical applications using an X Window server.


## Useful configuration

Go to Windows Terminal > Settings  
To start the Linux terminal in the Linux home directory instead of Windows profile folder, set the Starting Directory under Windows Profiles > Ubuntu to /home/username.  
To prevent Ctrl + C and Ctrl + V from interfering with Linux applications, go to Actions and delete the shortcuts. Ctrl + Shift + C and Ctrl + Shift + V will still work.  
The escape sequences for Shift + Enter and Ctrl + Enter need to be remapped so that these keys can be remapped in vim. Presumably, this is useful in other ways too. This can be done by directly editing the json for settings. Click the Open Json file button on the settings page. Add the bindings for `shift+enter` and `ctrl+enter` as shown in the json below.
```
{
    "$help": "https://aka.ms/terminal-documentation",
    "$schema": "https://aka.ms/terminal-profiles-schema",
    "actions": 
    [
        {
            "command": "unbound",
            "keys": "ctrl+c"
        },
        {
            "command": "unbound",
            "keys": "ctrl+v"
        },
        {
            "keys": "shift+enter",
            "command": {
                "action": "sendInput",
                "input": "\u001b[13;2u"
            }
        },
        {
            "keys": "ctrl+enter",
            "command": {
                "action": "sendInput",
                "input": "\u001b[13;5u"
            }
        },
```

It is convenient (but not necessary) to map the CapsLock key to Esc because Esc is a very frequently used key in vim and it is difficult to reach. Use AutoHotKey on Windows to do this mapping. It may be possible to do this mapping in Windows Terminal instead of doing it globally with AutoHotKey, but this remapping is convenient in Windows too. Add the following to a AutoHotKey script.

```
Capslock::Esc
```
