---
layout: post
title:  "Using vim's diff functionality"
date:   2024-11-19 00:12:00 +0530
categories: basics
tags: 
---

## Starting from the terminal

vim has built-in diff functionality. From the terminal, `vim -d file1 file2` opens the two files in a synchronized split with diff mode enabled. Pressing `]c` goes to the next change and `[c` goes to the previous change. The bracket indicates direction and c stands for change.

When the cursor is on or under a change, `do` for 'diff obtain' picks the text from the other buffer. `dp` for 'diff put' puts the text into the other buffer.

When either of the buffers are changed in a way that vim's update algorithm does not handle, the `:diffupdate` command may need to be invoked to reapply the diff highlighting and folding.

## Starting with a split already in place

With a vertical split already in place, the `:diffthis` command puts both windows in diff mode.

Use the `:diffo!` (diff off) command to turn off the diff mode while keeping both windows open.

## Starting with one file already open

The current window can be split with the second file in the new window with `:vsplit file2`. Or the fvf plugin can be used to show the list of files (`\f`) or buffers (`\b`) and the selected file or buffer can be opened in a vertical split with `Ctrl+v`.

## Comparing a modified buffer with the last saved file

Use the `:DiffOrig` command (improved from the default version) to open a diff in a new tab. The last saved file is shown with the name Original and is not modifiable. Exit this tab by simply closing it with `:tabc` (for tab close). It is not necessary to do `:diffo!` because the diff mode is local to a window and the window gets closed when the tab is closed. The window before opening the tab remains unaffected. While the diff is open, any work can be done in the other tabs, including in the original window.
